So yeah, so we are, now wondering, how
do we go about, functional programming?
Well, again, the core idea is that,
we use pure functions.
But what does this mean?
What, mantra should I have,
as a functional programmer,
to repeat to myself, to remind myself
how to do functional programming.
Well, that's what we're going to be
talking about the rest of the day.
And there are a few kind of guiding
principles that we're going to get into in
the different sections and the different
exercises that we work through.
But here are a couple of the main things.
Number one,
we have to do everything with functions.
Our program becomes, a function.
So instead of thinking again about
a program as like an imperative, series of
commands, of we have to do this and
then do that and then do the other thing.
We can start thinking about
our programs as, a function.
What are the inputs to my function,
what are the outputs.
So this requires us to think about our
programs a little bit more differently.
Instead of thinking, how should my
program run, which is a pretty imperative
question to be asking ourselves,
we should be asking ourselves.
What should my program take in.
And what should my program, return out.
Again, this is all a consequence of
doing everything with pure functions.
So, let's take again a look
at a couple of versions of,
a program, on the imperative side,
we have a series of commands.
Store this string in this variable.
Log this to the console.
Update this variable
with this other string.
Log that thing to the console.
Imperative commands.
Where For the inputs.
What are the outputs?
We're not really asking ourselves
questions in the imperative Style.
In the functional style our
program here is this single
function this greet function
that we're looking at.
And the program takes into key inputs
the greeting that you want to use.
And the name of the person
that you're greeting.
And the output is going to be this.
Hi, Alonzo, or Howdy Alan?
Response this string?
So we're now thinking about we
have a program a really tiny,
small little program, but
a program for greeting people.
We are thinking about what are its inputs,
a greeting and a name.
What is its output a string and so
this is what we're going to end up doing
in the functional programming style is
thinking about our programs as functions
that take inputs and return outputs.
So this means functional programs are a
really great fit for things like again
data transformation where you know
what type of thing is coming in, and
you know what thing you want to come out.
That is a really great use case for
thinking about your code
in terms of pure functions.
And the other thing that we know that
we're going to need to do functional
programming is to avoid side effects.
So we have to keep repeating to ourselves.
Only return output do nothing else.
Only look at input, look at nothing else.
So here's some code that has side effects.
Real quick, who can shout out a side
effect that this code is doing?
>> Assigning a new value to
the thesis dot name property
>> Assigning a new value to the thesis dot
name property, exactly.
So we have this thesis object and
this function is updating it.
It's affecting that object.
Anything else?
>> Using the outside water data test,
not then [INAUDIBLE].
>> Right?
So reading data from the outside world,
like this thesis object, that's
information that I need to do my work here
and I'm taking it from the outside world
instead of the inputs to the function.
So reading data from the outside world.
Exactly.
Anything else?
>> You're logging to,
>> Logging?
Yes, logging to the console,
we've already covered that one.
So these are the kinds of things that
we're going to when we want to do
functional programming.
We're gonna have to watch out for those
and try to find ways to conceive of our
programs in a way that
we can do the same work.
Without having those side effects,
so how can we do that?
Here is a refactored version,
of this program,
I'll let everybody take a look at,
so now instead of updating,
the global thesis object,
what are we doing instead?
>> Creating a new [INAUDIBLE].
>> We are creating a new object.
So this is going to be a technique that
we're going to get used to doing and
we're going to talk about a lot later
when we get into immutable data.
Especially when we work
with functional programs.
We don't want to update things in place
we want to take the old thing and
make a new slightly different copy
of it that we can return out.
So when we say things
like data transformation,
perhaps that's a misnomer because
we're not really changing the data.
We're taking some data and returning
new data based on the original data.
So in this case, we end up instead of
a change thesis object with different
values now we end up with a new object,
and the old one is still the same.
>> So this is not a unary function
that takes two arguments.
You mentioned earlier that a pure
function should only take one generally.
>> Interesting, okay, interesting point,
does a pure function need
to take only one argument?
No, functions can take lots of arguments,
and in fact in functional programming you
end up with functions that can get quite
large function signature,
so lots of arguments.
And the point that I was
making earlier about a pure
function should only look at its input.
By input, I mean, all of the arguments
passed into the function.
So let me restate that the pure function
should only look at its arguments
at the values that are coming in.
As arguments to it, and that might be one,
or it might be a bunch,
so we can, a term that often comes
up in this is arity of a function.
So the number of arguments that a function
takes can be described as it already is.
Again, we're not going to
focus on these terms, but
a single argument function could
be called a unary function.
Two argument function binary et cetera.
We are going to talk about why in
functional programming you often end up
with a lot of single argument functions,
because it makes your life
easier later on often.
But no, there is no requirement and,
excuse me if I misled or misspoke,
that pure functions need to take
only one argument, not the case.
Pure functions can take lots of arguments.
And in fact, since they can't look
at anything in the outside world,
you often have to pass in a lot of data
into the pure function because everything
that it needs to do its computation
has to come in through its arguments.
>> If this name the old thesis, it was one
of the first inputs, if you assigned in
a default value of thesis that would then
turn this to be in pure function, correct?
>> That's a great question.
So, let me restate if we assign
a default value to old thesis that made
it such that the default value of
old thesis is this thesis object so
that if I don't pass in an old
thesis argument by default,
I'm returning something
based on the thesis,
that we've already defined.
Does that make this no
longer a pure function?
Great question.
So, in the sense that the function
would then be looking at
something that I haven't
explicitly passed into it,
we might get a sense that
that's introducing impurity.
However, we said that a pure function,
it changes nothing about the world,
other than returning its value.
If we pass in the default thesis value for
the old thesis,
does this function change
anything about the world?
In what it does, so
I see some people shaking no,
it's still going to
return that new object.
So it's not going to
touch the thesis object,
even if we pass it in as a default.
So, okay, there's one indication.
And we said the other thing that we know
about pure functions is that they're
deterministic.
If I call it with the same arguments
I'm always gonna get the same result.
So, if I have a default value for
all thesis.
And then I call it,
let's say forget this thesis argument and
I call it rename Thesis Church-Turing.
Am I always to going to
get the same result?
On the face of it, we might think,
yes, as long as thesis stays the same,
yes, I'm never going to
get a different result.
Now the gotcha there is that in JavaScript
unlike in some functional languages
we have objects like this
are mutable meaning I could
change something about thesis
elsewhere in my program or
my sneaky co-worker could come in and
change it under my nose.
And in that case,
I might get a different output if the
value of thesis has changed between calls.
However, later today we're going to
look at how we can work with immutable
data in JavaScript So that,
I can be guaranteed because const thesis,
the thesis object itself is never going
to change and the values of the object.
If I work with immutable
data in JavaScript,
we can be guaranteed that the values
of the properties won't change either.
And so if with that asterisk, if I know
that I'm working with immutable data,
then I can be assured that I'm always
going to get that same output.
And so I would still have
a pretty pure function here.
Does that help answer that question?
>> Yes.
Thank you.
>> Awesome.
And we're going to talk a lot
about immutable data later.
I love talking about immutable data.
Super fun.
So I believe the question is,
can we use JavaScript's spread syntax
to spread out the old thesis object.
And manipulate the data or
return a new copy of the data based on
those spread out values,
instead of doing it this way.
There's definitely lots of different
ways we could write this code.
This is just one way that we could
conceive of doing this operation.
Again, the trick with functional
programming is to make sure that you're
not changing anything about
the outside world and
that whatever that you're
returning back is a new thing,
a new object instead of that old
object that you wanted to update.
And again, we're going to talk
a lot about how we can do those non
mutating updates later in the course.
But essentially using things like spread
syntax is really useful in in functional
JavaScript sometimes especially when
working with arrays and what not,
we're going to,
we're going to see that later.
And so that doesn't necessarily
introduce any impurity here,
unless you were, let's say,
working with mutable or
changeable objects as some of those
values and then changing those objects.
So It doesn't really affect the purity,
what syntax we're using.